Respiratory System

Main respiratory disease signs and symptoms:
	1- Dyspnea
	2- Chest pain
	3- Coughing and wheezing
	4- Sputum production
	5- Hemoptysis

What is cardiothoracic ratio:
	Ans/ Widest part of heart and ribcage is meassured laterally, if heart is %50 of thorax width, its enlarged.

What is cardiac index:
	Ans/ Provides cardiac output efficiency, regarding body size and cardiac output.

Define aspiration penumonia:
	Ans/ Aspiration of food, drinks, etc... causing pneumonia, happens more in individuals whose level of consciousness is altered.

Define tidal volume:
	Ans/ Represets the amount of air inhaled or exhaled during inspiration or expiration respectively.

Describe parts of sternum:
	1- The manubrium: articulates with 1st and part of 2nd coastal cartilages.
	2- The body: Articulates with part of 2nd, until 7th coastal cartilages.
	3- The xiphisternum: Remains cartilagenous into adult life.

Describe mechanisms gasses dissolving in water:
	1- Gas molecules enter water
	2- They excert tension into the water.
	3- At equilibrium, tension same as partial pressure of gas.

Urinary system

Explain stages of chronic kidney disease:
	1- Stage 1: Kidney damage with normal kidney function. (90 or higher GFR)
	2- Stage 2: Kidney damage with mild loss of kidney function. (60-89 GFR)
	3- Stage 3: Kidney damage with moderate loss of kidney function. (30-59 GFR)
	4- Stage 4: Kidney damage with severse loss of kidney function. (15-29 GFR)
	5- Stage 5: Kidney failure. (GFR less than 15)

Write about risk factor of chronic kidney disease (failure):
	1- Diabetes
	2- High blood pressure
	3- Obesity
	4- Aging
	5- Family history of kidney failure
	6- Hispanic, Asian

Mechanism action of loop diuretics:
	1- Loop diuretics act primarily on thick ascending limb of the loop of henle.
	2- Inhibits NKCC2 Transporter, this transporter is responsible for reabsorbing Na+/K+/2Cl-. 
	3- By blocking the transporter, the electrolytes will be excreted.
	4- This reduces osmotic gradient, thus less water will be reabsorbed.
	5- With less blood volume, less bp will be achieved.

Write briefly about risk factor of calcium based stone:
	1- Excessive excretion of calcium, oxalate, uric acid.
	2- Factors that cause insolubility. e.g. insufficient citrate excretion, it forms soluble complex with calcium.
	3- Concentrated urine
	4- Abnormal urinary tract
	5- Renal tubular acidosis

Mention blood supply for bladder:
	Ans/ The bladder is mainly supplied by (Superior, middle, inferior vesical arteries), also uterine and vaginal arteries in females.

Enumerate types of urinary incontinence:
	1- Stress urinary incontinence
	2- Urge urinary incontinence
	3- Mixed Urinary incontinence
	4- Insensible incontinence
	5- Nocturnal enuresis

What is Chronic kidney disease/failure:
	Ans/ Chronic kidney disease/failure is a progressive and irreversible loss of renal function or GFR decrease for at least 3 months.

Define uses of ultrasound:
	1- Determine the presence of hydronephrosis.
	2- Determine the nature of renal masses.
	3- Evaluation of renal stone, characterized by acoustic shadow.
	4- Evaluation of urinary retention.
	5- Allows ultrasound guided intervention.
	6- Assessment of hematuria

Main causes of hyperkalemia:
	1- Chronic kidney disease
	2- K+ rich diets
	3- Hypoaldosteronism
	4- Addison disease
	5- Lactic acidosis

Advantages of hemodialysis:
	1- Effective
	2- 4/7 free days from treatment
	3- Dialysis dose easily prescribed

Disadvantages of hemodialysis:
	1- Diet Restriction
	2- Limits holidays
	3- Access problems
	4- High cost
	5- CVS instability

Label juxtaglomerular parts: Refer to microanatomy session.

GIT

Dif between omphalocele and gastroschisis:
	Feature			Omphalocele		Gastroschisis

	Site of defect		Central umbilical	Right paraumbilical
	Sac			Always present		Never present
	Gender			Frequent in female	Equal
	Intestinal atresia	Rare			Up to %10
	Associated anomalies	Frequent		Rare

Write about voluntary stage of swallowing:
	Ans/ Chewing the food, and rolling it back into pharynx by tongue pressure. 	

Write short note about salivary secretion regulation:
	Ans/ Salivary secretion is regulated by autonomic nervous system, supplied by sympathetic fibers and parasympathetic fibers:
		1- Stimulation of sympathetic fibers cause secretion of saliva rich in organic constituents such as mucus, and cause vasoconstriction.
		2- Stimulation of parasympathetic fibers cause secretion of saliva rich in water, causes vasodilation.

Enumerate parts of midgut:
	1-Small intestine
	2- Cecum
	3- Appendix
	4- Ascending colon
	5- Right 2/3 of transverse colon

Stages in development of esophagus:
	1- Elongation occurs during 2nd month.
	2- Recanalization occurs during 3rd month.
	3- Differentiation of stratified squamous epithelium occurs during 4th month.
	4- Induction of muscle formation in splanchnic mesoderm occurs during 2nd month, initially only smooth muscle forms.
	5- Trans-differentiation of smooth muscle to skeletal muscle occurs in the upper two-thirds of esophagus.

Write blood supply to stomach:
	Ans/ (Right, left, short) gastric artery

Extra-intestinal manifestation of IBD:
	1- They may precede GI symptoms.
	2- Most common symptoms: Oral aphthous ulcers, arthralgia, backpain
	3- Eye symptoms: uveitis, scleritis etc...
	4- Skin manifestation
	5- Liver manifestation

Areas of liver not covered by peritoneum:
	1- Bare area of liver
	2- Gallbladder fossa
	3- Groove for IVC
	4- Groove for ligamentum venosum
	5- Porta hepatis

Complications of peptic ulcer disease:
	1- Bleeding
	2- Perforation of ulcer
	3- Pyloric Obstruction
	4- Penetration

Function of ileocecal valve:
	1- Prevent backflow of colonic contents into SI.
	2- Resists back pressure of 60 cm water.
	3- Allows emptying of ileal contents into the cecum.

Function of large intestine:
	1- Reabsorption of water and electrolytes, and compacting intestinal contents into feces.
	2- Absorption of important vitamins produced by bacterial action.
	3- Storing fecal material before defecation.
