GIT

Enumerate anomalies of the biliary system:
	1- Duplication of gallbladder
	2- Biliary hypoplasia
	3- Extrahepatic biliary atresia

Write short notes about gallbladder:
	Ans/ The gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ, which lies underneath the liver at the junction of the right and quadrate lobes, it acts as reservoir for bile which it concentrates up to 50mL of bile. 
	The gallbladder composed of fundus, body and neck, which peritoneum fully sorrounds the fundus and binds body and neck to liver.

Outcomes of H-Pylori:
	1- Gastric cancer
	2- Gastric ulcer
	3- Gastritis
	4- Peptic ulcer

Write about anatomical surface and lining of abdominal wall:
	1- Median Plane: Passes through the body, dividing it into left and right halves.
	2- Transumblical Plane: Passes through the umbilcus and intervertebral discs between L3 and L4.

Write short notes about anti-reflux mechanisms that prevent GERD:
	* The Muscle of lower eso, just above the junction with stomach, is thickened and functions as sphincter.
	* short portion os eso below the diaphragm has valve like action, it becomes curved during increased intra-abdominal pressure, preventing reflux of stomach content into eso.

Enumerate factors keeping liver in place:
	1- Peritoneal ligaments connecting liver to abdominal walls.
	2- Intra-abdominal pressure maintained by tone of abdominal muscles.
	3- Hepatic veins connecting liver to IVC.

Enumerate features of small bowel on Plain radiography:
	1- Solid feces: Absent
	2- diameter: 3-5cm
	3- radius of curvature: Small
	4- Number of loops: many
	5- Distribution of loops: Central

Classify salivary glands according to their type of secretion:
	1- Serous glands: mainly made of serous cells, secrete thin and watery saliva containing enzymes. (Parotid glands)
	2- Mucous glands: mainly made of mucous cells, secrete thick, viscous saliva with high mucin content. (Sublingual glands)
	3- Mixed glands: made of both serous and mucous cells. (Submandibular glands)

Write short note about involutary stage of swallowing:
	1- Pharyngeal stage: Food enters pharynx, swallowing receptors are stimulated, brain stem initiates series of automatic pharyngeal contractions.
	2- Esophageal stage: Esophagus conduct food from pharynx to stomach. (9 sec), it has primary and secondary peristaltic movements (PM).

Write short note about liver lobes classification:
	* Liver lobes are classified in 2 ways

	Anatomical lobes:
		1- On diaphragmatic surface: The liver is divided into left and right, by attachment of falciform ligament.
		2- On visceral surface: The liver is divided into 4 lobes (Right, left, caudate, quadrate) lobes.

	Physiological lobes: The liver is divided into left and right lobes by an imaginary saggital plane.

Enumerate 5 features of illium:
	1- Position and length: 3.5m in length and is mostly in right lower quadrant.
	2- Walls: Thin and less vascular
	3- Lumen: Narrow (3.5 cm)
	4- Villi: Low amount, short, thin
	5- Mesentery: Attached below-right of aorta.

Enumerate boundaries of inguinal canal:
	1- Anterior: Obliquus interns abdominis
	2- Posterior: Transverse fascia
	3- Medial: Lacunar ligament
	4- Roof: Transversus abdominis
	5- Floor: Inguinal ligament

Urinary System

What are indication of the initiation of dialysis:
	Ans/ Uraemic symptoms, fluid overload, acidosis, hyperkalemia, pericarditis

Factors important in urinary K+ excretion:
	1- Aldosterone secretion
	2- Flow in distal tuble
	3- Increase tubular sodium delivery
	4- ADH
	5- Alkalosis

CT-KUB and CT-urography, how are they used in kidney disease:
	Both are used in:
	1- Investigation of renal and ureteric stone, assement of stone size and location.
	2- Investigation of renal and ureteric tumor, differentiating between malignant or benign.
	3- Detection of renal collection of pus.
	4- Grading renal injuries.
	5- Investigation of bladder tumor.

Categorize hormones that act ON kidney:
	1- ADH
	2- Aldosterones
	3- NPs (Natriuretic peptide hormones)
	4- PTH (Parathyroid hormones)

Write about neurological control of urinary bladder:
	1- Sympathetic: Causes relaxation of detrusor muscle, promoting urine retention.
	2- Parasympathetic: Causes contraction of detrusor muscle, stimulating micturition (Urination).
	3- Somatic: Innervates external urethral sphincter, providing voluntary control over micturition.

Genetic and epigenetic abnormalities may promote tumor development or growth in number of ways:
	1- Activation of oncogenes encoding transcription factors.
	2- Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes.
	3- Overexpression of peptide growth factors.
	4- Methylations or acetylations inactivating genes encoding detoxification enzymes.
	5- Gene fusions
	6- MicroRNA

What is urinary tract host defence:
	1- Urine:
		* Acidic pH
		* Mechanical flushing of urine flow

	2- Mucosal immunity:
		* Mucopolysaccharide lining increase difficuly for bacterial penetration.
		* In men, prostatic secretion contain bactericidal zinc.

Define paraneoplastic syndrome, categorize four paraneoplastic syndrome related to renal cell carcinoma:
	Ans/ Paraneoplastic syndromes are due to ectopic hormone secretion by tumors.
		Anemia %30, Hypertension %25, Polycythemia %5, Hypercalcemia %10-20

Discuss RAS in pathogenesis of hypertension:
	1- Reduced blood flow to kidneys, cause renin to be released, which converts angiotensinogen to angiotensin 1.
	2- Angiotensin 1 converted to angiotensin 2 by ACE in lungs, A2 leads to increased blood pressure, increased Na+ resabsorption, stimulated release of aldosterone and adrenaline.
	3- Angiotensin 2 inhibits renin release, forming a negative feedback loop, but in abnormal conditions this feedback loop is disrupted, causing A2 to be rapidly released.
	4- Aldosterone promotes Na+ retention and K+ excretion, this increases blood volume, leading to even more hypertension.

Label nephron and collecting system parts: Refer to the Renal Microanatomy Session.

Psychology

Define human diversity and its impact on healthcare:
	Ans/ Human diversity encompasses variation in race, culture, language, gender, religion and other characteristics.
		1- Health Disparities
		2- Patient-Physician relationship
		3- Health Beliefs and practices

Main factors influencing health behavior:
	1- Individual factors
	2- Social factors
	3- Enviromental factors

Write about cognititve change of aging:
	1- Memory: Aging is associated with changing in memory function, e.g. episodic memory loss.
	2- Executive functioning: Older people may experience decline in problem-solving, decision making, cognitive flexibilty.
	3- Wisdom: Deeper understanding of life by aging.

Describe importance of compliance and adherence:
	1- Treatment effectiveness: Non-compliance or poor adherence impacts treatment efficiency.
	2- Patient Outcomes: Enhanced compliance and adherence leads to improved patient outcomes.
	3- Healthcare resources: Optimal compliance and adherence contribute to efficient utilization of healthcare resources, preventing complications and reduced healthcare expenditure.

Enumerate types of coping strategies with short note:
	1- Problem-Focused Coping: Facing the problem and solving it, to cope with stress.
	2- Emotion-Focused Coping: Seek emotional help to cope with stress, e.g. social support.
	3- Avoidant coping: Avoiding the stressor.

Write about key principles in behavioral theory:
	1- Classical conditioning: Association of a neutral stimulus, to meaningful stimulus.
	2- Operant conditioning: Focus on consequences of behavior, to strengthen or weaken future behavior.
	3- Stimulus discrimination and generalizion:
		Discrimination: Learning to respond differently to similar stimuli.
		Generalization: Applying learned behavior to similar stimuli.

Discuss ethical considerations in breaking bad news:
	1- Truth telling: Provide honest and accurate information with respect to their preference of information delivery.
	2- Cultural sensitivity: Respect cultural differences on how they react to bad news.
	3- Privacy and confidentiality: Ensure patient privacy throughout the process of bad breaking news.

Write about common paraphilias:
	1- Exhibitionism: Exposure of ones genitals to public for sexual arousal.
	2- Voyeurism: Observes other people engaging in sexual activities, to gain sexual arousal.
	3- Fetishism: Sexual arousal from non living things. e.g. specific body parts
	4- Sadomasochism: Engaging in sexual activities involving dominance or submission and infliction or receiving pain or humiliation.
	5- Pedophilia: Sexual attraction to children.

Describe styles of attachment in children:
	A/ Secure attachments: Children feel safe and secure with their caregiver.
	B: Insecure attachments:
		1- Avoidant attachment: Children appear emotionally distant from their caregiver.
		2- Anxious resistence: Children are very anxious and insecure.
		3- Disorganized attachment: Children seem confused and anxious in presence of caregiver.

Describe role of playing in cognitive, social and emotional development:
	1- Cognitive development: Playing stimulates brain development and improves cognitive skills such as problem solving.
	2- Social development: Playing provides opportunities for children to interact with others, teaching them essential social skills and co-operation.
	3- Emotional development: Playing allows children to express and manage their emtions.

Enumerate 4 types of dichotomies of MBTI:
	1- Intraversion vs Extroversion
	2- Sensing vs Intuition
	3- Thinking vs Feeling
	4- Judging vs Perceiving

Respiratory System

Enumerate upper respiratory and lower respiratory system:
	Upper Tract:
		1- Nasal cavity
		2- Pharynx
		3- Larynx
	Lower Tract:
		1- Trachea
		2- Main Bronchi
		3- Bronchiole
		4- Alveoli

Natural defence of respiratory system against infection:
	1- Nasal Hairs
	2- Coughing and sneezing reflex
	3- Lymphoid follicles of pharynx and tonsils
	4- Ciliated columnar epithelium 
	5- Alveolar macrophages

Mention BCG vaccine and its role:
	Ans/ BCG is a vaccine against tuberculosis that is prepared from a strain of Attenuated live bovine tuberculosis bacillus, Efficacy lasts at most 15 years.

Describe asthma in children and their characterstics:
	Ans/ Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways, characterstics:
		1- Chronic inflammation
		2- Susceptibility
		3- Variable airflow obstruction
		4- Airway hyper-responsiveness
		5- Reversibility

Define bronchoscopy:
	Ans/ Bronchoscopy is used in diagnosis of bronchial carcinoma, to visualize tumors and obtain a tissue sample for histology.

Clarify the thoracic ribs attachment the sternum:
	1- True ribs (1-7): Attach directly to sternum via their own cartilages.
	2- False ribs (8-10): Attach to sternum via cartilage of the rib above them.
	3- Floating ribs (11-12): Not connected to sternum.

Define dead space in lungs:
	Ans/ It refers to portion of lung where air does not participate in gas exchange with blood, it includes both anatomical and alveolar dead space.

Enumerate factors that are changing during ventilation:
	1- Tidal volume
	2- Respiratory rate
	3- Quiet vs forced breathing

Mention characterstics of pulmonary circulation:
	1- Low resistance
	2- Low pressure
	3- Recieves entire cardiac output.

How hyperventilation cause tetany:
	Ans/ Hyperventilation cause decrease in CO2 so pH increases, Ca2+ is soluble in acid, so with pH increasing Ca2+ cannot remain in blood, causing nerve hyperexcitability leading to tetany.

Define hypoxia and its types:
	Hypoxia is decreased oxygen levels in tissues, types:
		1- Hypoxemic hypoxia: decreased breathable O2.
		2- Anemic hypoxia: decreased functional Hb.
		3- Stagnant hypoxia: decreased blood flow - heart failure
		4- Histotoxic hypoxia: Unable to make use of O2.

Hb O2 dissociation curve with temperature and pH:
	1- Increasing temp decrease affinity Hb for O2, so dissociation curve shifts to right
	2- Increasing pH increase affinity Hb for O2, so dissociation curve shifts to left

I-I

Write about virulence factor of bacteria:
	1- Antimicrobial resistence
	2- Exotoxins
	3- Flagella
	4- Polysaccharide capsules
	5- Serum resistance

Enumerate ways of preventing microbial microbiota that may cause hospital acquired infection:
	A: Exogenously acquired infections:
		1- Hand hygiene
		2- High standards of enviromental cleanliness
		3- Judicious antibiotic prescribing
		4- Disposable gowns, aprons and gloves
		5- Sterile surgical instruments
	B: Endogenously acquired infections
		1- Disinfection of skin
		2- Prophylaxis

Compare briefly between antigen drift and antigen shift and their playing viral evolution and immune evasion:
	1- Antigenic drift: Accumulation of point mutations on viral surface resulting in new strain.
	2- Antigenic shift: Results in new subtype of virus.
